I have two more notes on postfix syntax in the pipeline. But first, I'd like to
stop for some updates:

- I implemented bindings! For now, only in the form of function parameters. But
  using an anonymous function that you evaluate immediately, it should be
  possible to simulate `let` bindings. I plan to add those as syntax sugar
  later.
- This means that recursion (which has been in the language for a while) should
  now actually be usable. Before, it was possible to write recursive functions,
  but I struggled to actually do something with that.
- To simplify things in advance, I moved function resolution to runtime, making
  the language much more dynamic. Not the direction I want to go in, but I think
  it's what I need right now: A much simpler compiler and less complexity
  overall, making it easier to make progress where it matters most.

I had some trouble accommodating the expanded syntax tree required for this. For
a while, I went down the wrong path there, making things way too complicated. In
the end, I realized that a much simpler, less type-safe, uniform syntax node
representation would work better; so that's what I went with.

What I _should_ be doing now is verify that recursion is _actually_ usable, and
use that to write a test which demonstrates the lack of live code updates (or
hot reloading; whatever nomenclature we end up going with). That's the next
priority, as I want to build everything else around a
[tight, interactive core](/daily/2025-01-20).

What I did instead, was sucker myself into doing some code cleanups. This is
important too. After all, getting to terms with the shape of that thing I'm
writing; the code database, the incremental-only compiler that it implies, the
editor that drives that; is a constant struggle. And maybe it also serves as a
bit of a break for me.
