I like designs that consist of simple, orthogonal, and composable elements. To
understand what that means, let's look at a design that _isn't_ that. Here's how
you define a struct in Rust:

```rust
struct Measurement {
    value: Value,
	unit: Unit,
}
```

To define a struct, you have to give it a name, and it's always
[nominally typed](/daily/2025-02-26). Those are three concepts (data layout,
type name, nominal typing) that are inextricably tied together in this one
thing.

Let's look at another Rust example, defining a tuple:

```rust
type Measurement = (Value, Unit);
```

Tuples are always [structurally typed](/daily/2025-02-25), so giving them a name
is optional. Here, I'm providing a name using a type alias. I think design-wise,
this is a bit better than the previous example; because everything I'm showing
here is orthogonal and composable. But there's no way to make it nominally
typed.

At least not directly. You could completely change it into something else, a
tuple struct:

```rust
struct Measurement(Value, Unit);
```

Now we're back to using a struct which bundles all those different concepts,
like the original example above. Except that this kind of struct is also
partially redundant with tuples.

I think this approach to data types is weird and undesirable. Is is neither
simple (some elements are bundles of multiple concepts), orthogonal (different
elements are redundant with one another), nor composable (can't make a nominally
typed tuple or a structurally typed struct).
