With postfix syntax, [yesterday's example](/daily/2025-05-11) would look like
this:

```
_  # parameter
{} # body
	fn
```

(You could argue that this is a backwards way to display a function literal, and
that those should have special (prefix) syntax regardless of how the rest of the
language looks. And I would agree. But remember, the priority right now is a
[minimal but working](/daily/2025-05-06) syntax. So this still supports my
decision to switch to prefix _right now_. But back to the example.)

With [restricted structural editing](/daily/2025-05-04), you would only type
`fn`, and the children (in this placeholder form) are created automatically. And
while that should work great with prefix syntax, it would become very weird with
postfix.

For a start, note how the children are kinda sorted by relevance, top to bottom,
for a more natural way of reading. This puts the more relevant child farther
away from the parent though, so after typing `fn`, you might want to navigate to
the parameter to edit that first, skipping the body, edit that afterwards, then
move beyond the `fn` to type whatever comes next.

(We could invert the order of the children, which might or might not be better.
Just another example of the million little decisions you have to make, when
operating in [unfamiliar territory](/daily/2025-05-10).)

So instead of just writing top to bottom, as we could with prefix syntax, we'd
be skipping around the code, editing here and there. That's a lot of friction,
to do something so simple.
